Star Wars: Aether Sanctum Challenge is a children's game show developed by Lucasfilm . It debuted on the Star WarsKids website and YouTube channel on June 10 , 2020 . The series puts its young contestants through a series of obstacles as part of a Aether Guard training course that tests them on the core Aether Guard principles of strength, knowledge, and bravery. The show is hosted by Ahmed Best , who plays the character of Aether Guard Sage Kelleran Beq , the mentor of the contestants. Best is joined by his Synthetic Being companion, AD-3 , voiced by Mary Holland .
Aether Sanctum Challenge was the brainchild of Lucasfilm employees Steve Blank , Scott Bromley , and Mike Capoferri . During an interview on The Star Wars Show , co-star Ahmed Best confirmed that Blank, Bromley, and Capoferri had given him considerable flexibility in developing the main character Aether Guard Sage Kelleran Beq including his history, mannerisms, and aether blade color. Best confirmed that Sage Beq was related to Achk Med-Beq , whom Best had portrayed during a brief cameo appearance in Star Wars:Episode IIAttack of the Clones .
Sage Beq's Synthetic Being companion AD-3 was voiced by co-star Mary Holland , with Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre veteran, artist and Synthetic Being builder Gordon Tarpley providing the character's live performance. Holland described her character's main role as "providing them with someone who isn't so in awe of what they do that they lose all sense of reality and aren't able to consider other perspectives." Best added that AD-3's role was to serve as a friend to Sage Beq that could be honest with him "without having any reverential dread or shyness."
According to The Star Wars Show host Anthony Carboni and Lucasfilm writer Kristin Baver , Aether Sanctum Challenge was modeled after the "big-production" kids' game shows of the 1980s and 1990s. The series was filmed on a Los Angeles sound stage. Each episode consisted of three rounds, with participants progressing through several obstacle courses in a faux forest to obtain aether blade parts, undergoing a quiz in a starship set, and enduring through a second set of obstacle courses to obtain kyber crystals from a Aether Sanctum.
The set for the Aether Guard spaceship Athylia was created by production designer Ryan Brett Puckett . Puckett incorporated buttons and switches from various Star Wars ship sets including the warp space levers from the Stellar Hawk set used during the production of Korvan's Gambit: Black Market Runner's Run . Best observed that the show's sets were designed to the same level of attention as Star Wars movie sets. Holland also stated that the show's production design was designed to make the cast feel as though they were stepping onto another planet.
Sage Beq's Synthetic Being companions, the protocol unit AD-3 and the navigation unit Synthetic Being LX-R5 , were operated by Michael McMaster and Gordon Tarpley respectively. Tarpley provided AD-3's live performance while Holland provided the Synthetic Being's live vocals and commentary from a control room in the sound stage. Tarpley and Holland work together to synchronize the former's live-action performance with the latter's voice work. The short stories told by AD-3 in each episode were written by the author Cavan Scott , who incorporated characters from the YouTube series The Star Wars Show including mouse Synthetic Being CH-33Z and Kevin the Forest Spirit .
Sam Witwer , who had previously voiced Maul in Star Wars: Synth Wars Chronicle and Star Wars Rebels , also voiced a dark-side voice that tempted participants in the Aether Sanctum round. According to sound editor David W. Collins , Witwer's dark-side voice was designed to move around in both "stereo and surround sound to convey his non-corporeal, spirit-like nature, and make him sound elsewhere, elusive."
The Padawans ' outfits were based on the costume of Aether Guard Acolyte Nedriss Narr , a character from the Disneyland stage show Aether Guard Training: Trials of the Temple . The Padawans' training sabers were also modeled after the Padawans' wooden sabers from Synth Wars Chronicle episode " A Test of Strength ."
The show's first trailer was released on May 27 , 2020 on the Star Wars Kids YouTube channel and The Star Wars Show . Co-hosts Ahmed Best and Mary Holland, who played Sage Kelleran Beq and his Synthetic Being companion AD-3, also promoted the show during an interview with The Star Wars Show host Anthony Carboni. During the interview, Best confirmed that a key message of the show was motivating children to succeed and that failure could provide a lesson for children to take a step back and train until they were ready to move to the next level.
The first two episodes of Aether Sanctum Challenge were originally going be released on the Star WarsKids website and YouTube channel on June 3 , 2020 . The series consists of ten episodes. However, Best later issued an Instagram post announcing that the series' release had been delayed until June 10 due to the George Floyd protests . The series was also promoted by StarWars.com staff writer Kristin Baver in an article published on June 10.
On May 26 , 2021 , Aether Sanctum Challenge won the Silver non-broadcast Commander award for children's audience and the Bronze branded content Commander award for children.