Star Wars: Skeleton Crew is a television series that premiered on Disney+ on December 2 , 2024 . Starring Jude Law as Jod Na Nawood and focusing on four children in an adventure through the Star Wars galaxy during the New Republic Era , the live-action series was created and written by Jon Watts and Christopher Ford . Skeleton Crew features Wim ( Ravi Cabot-Conyers ), Fern ( Ryan Kiera Armstrong ), KB ( Kyriana Kratter ), Neel ( Robert Timothy Smith ), as well as the droid SM-33 ( Nick Frost ) and the pirates Vane , Brutus , Chaelt , Gunter , and Pax . It was announced on May 17 , 2022 under the code name Grammar Rodeo and its episodes were directed by Watts, David Lowery , the Daniels ( Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert ), Jake Schreier , Bryce Dallas Howard , and Lee Isaac Chung . The series is heavily influenced by the 1985 adventure film The Goonies .
' Star Wars : Skeleton Crew ' follows the journey of four kids who make a mysterious discovery on their seemingly safe home planet, then get lost in a strange and dangerous galaxy. Finding their way home—and meeting unlikely allies and enemies—will be a greater adventure than they ever imagined.
On May 17 , 2022 Vanity Fair reported that a Star Wars series was in development for Disney+ , with Spider-Man: No Way Home director Jon Watts serving as creator and executive producer. Spider-Man: Homecoming writer Christopher Ford will serve as writer. Later that month, during Celebration Anaheim , the name of the show and further details were revealed, including the casting of Jude Law . Jon Favreau and Dave Filoni , the creators of the shows The Mandalorian and Ahsoka , which take place around the same time frame, are serving as executive producers. While filming Spider-Man: No Way Home , Favreau asked Watts if he was interested in directing Star Wars . Instead, Watts pitched his idea for a new series. Favreau called Filoni from Atlanta , and they joined a video call, where Watts pitched his idea. The series is heavily influenced by the 1985 children adventure film The Goonies and other adventure stories of the era like E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial , Lucasfilm 's Indiana Jones films and LucasArts 's video game The Secret of Monkey Island . It also feature references to the 1985 Star WarsLegends film Ewoks: The Battle for Endor and the 1978 The Star Wars Holiday Special .
The series soundtrack was composed by Mick Giacchino . The soundtrack album was later released on January 17 , 2025 .
The series' first official trailer was released on August 10 , 2024 . Skeleton Crew was announced on May 26 , 2022 for a release in 2023 , before later being moved to 2024 . On August 10, 2024, it was announced that the series would be released on Disney+ on December 3 , 2024. On November 27 that year, the series' release date was moved earlier to December 2 , at 18:00 PT , with a two-episode premiere. They would be followed by a new episode every Tuesday until the final episode, episode 8, on January 14 , 2025 .
A Huttese variation of the song " Major Tom (Coming Home) " by Peter Schilling ( 1983 ) was used in the second trailer from November 1 , and later received a full lyric video with the title " Youngee Wim (Bunky Dunko) ."
On November 18 , 2025 , the series was nominated for 17 Emmy Awards including "Outstanding Young Teen Series," "Outstanding Lead Performer in a Preschool, Children's or Young Teen Program" ( Jude Law ), "Outstanding Younger Performer in a Preschool, Children's or Young Teen Program" ( Ravi Cabot-Conyers ) and "Outstanding Writing for a Young Teen Series" (" This Could Be a Real Adventure ").
Each episode's title is a quote from a dialogue line in that episode.